Mailing lists for GNU Emacs:		Last updated 20 Dec 87

Bug reports, fixes for bugs, and suggestions for improvements in GNU
Emacs should be sent to bug-gnu-emacs@prep.ai.mit.edu (Internet
address) or ...!ucbvax!prep.ai.mit.edu!bug-gnu-emacs (UUCP address).

Bug reports, fixes for bugs, and suggestions for improvements in GDB
(Gnu's DeBugger) should be sent to bug-gdb@prep.ai.mit.edu (Internet
address) or ...!ucbvax!prep.ai.mit.edu!bug-gdb (UUCP address).

If you think something is a bug in Emacs, it might be one; or, it
might be a misunderstanding or even a feature.  Before beginning to
report bugs, please read the section ``Reporting Emacs Bugs'' toward
the end of the GNU Emacs reference manual (or the built-in Info
system) for a discussion of how and when to send in bug reports.

Do not expect an answer for a bug report, except sometimes in the form
of a fix for the bug in the next release.  Reporting a bug is done to
get the bug fixed for everyone.  Likewise, we maintainers fix bugs in
order to help the entire community.  We see no such duty to aid
individuals one at a time, such as by sending them individual
messages, and have no time to do this since we are busy doing things
for the entire community.  If you want help for yourself in
particular, you may have to hire someone.  You might find one by
looking in the the service list (file SERVICE in this directory).

Anything addressed to the implementors and maintainers of GNU Emacs
should be sent only to bug-gnu-emacs, NOT to info-gnu-emacs.

Information and questions addressed to the general user community are
sent to info-gnu-emacs@prep.ai.mit.edu (Internet address) or
...!ucbvax!prep.ai.mit.edu!info-gnu-emacs (UUCP address).  This list
forwards one way onto the USENET newsgroup comp.emacs (once known as
net.emacs).  (Users at non-USENET sites may receive articles from
comp.emacs by subscribing to: unix-emacs@bbncc5.arpa, by making their
request to: unix-emacs-request@bbncc5.arpa.)  Since it is a very large
list, don't send it anything that is not seriously important to many
people.

Most of the time, when you reply to a message sent to info-gnu-emacs,
the reply should not go to info-gnu-emacs.  But most mailer reading
programs supply all the recipients of the original as recipients of
the reply, by default.  Make a point of deleting info-gnu-emacs from
the list when it does not belong.

Another list, info-gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu, is used for progress reports
for the GNU project in general, and for requests for people to do
work.

The list, gnu-manual@a.cs.uiuc.edu, is a working group whose
volunteers write, proofread and comment on the developing GNU Emacs
Lisp programmers' manual.

There are also mailing lists for other GNU programs.  Specific
information about these mailing lists. obtaining GNU software, or GNU
activities in Cambridge and elsewhere can be directed to:
gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu

Send messages ABOUT these lists, such as reports of mail problems, or
requests to be added or removed, to info-gnu-emacs-request (or
info-gnu-request, bug-gnu-emacs-request, bug-gdb-request, etc), NOT to
info-gnu-emacs, etc.  *-request goes only to the people who can do
something about your requests and problems, and thus avoids disturbing
everyone else.
